A rotary electric motor can be modelled by
this electrical schematic. Important components
of the model are a resistor and this is the
resistance of the armature coil.
That's the electromagnet in the rotor. The
other component is a voltage source. A motor
can be used in reverse as a generator but
even when it's acting as a motor the generator
is producing a voltage that opposes the applied
voltage and this is referred to as the back
EMF. And this voltage is proportional to the
rotational speed of the motor.
The current that flows into the motor is given
by the difference between the applied voltage
fee and the back EMF voltage VB divided by
the armature resistance RA.
The torque generated by the motor is proportional
to the current that flows through the motor
and the proportionality constant is KM. These
two KMs have exactly the same value though
they're written typically with different units.
This one here has units of volts seconds per
radian. This one here has units of Newton
meters per Amp but with a little bit of effort
you can show that these two units are in fact
equivalent.
There are two ways to control an electric
motor. We can control the voltage or we can
control the current.
Let's first of all look at the voltage control
case. So we're going to adjust the voltage
that we apply to the motor and we can do that
using a power amplifier or something like
a pulse with modulator. And we'll look at
that shortly. I've written down all the relevant
equation and if I rearrange this equation
we can get an expression for the rotational
speed omega in terms of the applied voltage
the current and so on.
Imagine that the motor starts at rest and
I apply a voltage, current flows and the motor
will start to increase in speed. As it does
so the back EMF will increase and eventually
the back EMF will be equal to the applied
voltage and then no current will flow into
the motor. The motor will then stop accelerating
and when this occurs we have a simple expression
for Omega it's the applied voltage divided
by the motor constant.
Now in practice the motor has got friction
and in practice that makes the speed of the
motor less than the value shown here. The
important take away is that the speed of the
motor is proportional to the applied voltage.
The most common way to drive an electric motor
today is with what's called an H bridge circuit.
It comprises four switches and they’re typically
some kind of field effect transistor. They're
very small and they're very efficient when
they're closed they have a very very small
resistance.
As shown here no current can flow through
the motor but if I close two of the switches
then we see the current will flow through
the motor in one particular direction and
the motor will rotate in the forward direction.
If I open those two switches and close the
other two, current flows in the other direction
through the motor and the motor rotates backwards.
One of the advantages of these electronic
fed switches is that we can them on and off
very quickly. The voltage that's applied to
the motor can be the maximum value for a time
period which we refer to as the on time and
there can zero for what we refer to as the
off time. And the electronics which is driving
the H bridge circuit is able to control the
duty cycle. That's the ratio of the on time
to the period and this can vary from the voltage
being always off to the voltage being always on.
The motor responds to the average voltage.
So here's an example where the duty cycle
is relatively low that is the voltage is off
for more time than it is on. And the motor
sees an effective average voltage shown by
the red line as I increase the duty cycle
the average voltage rises and I can increase
the duty cycle even further.
So by adjusting the duty cycle which is something
that a micro controller can do quite easily,
we can control the average voltage in an almost
continuous fashion. This switching happens
very very quickly, typically a frequency of
at least 1 kHz.
An alternative way of controlling the electric
motor is to regulate the current that flows
into the motor. There are many ways to create
a control current source.
A common way is to take a control voltage
source and apply a current feedback loop.
The torque generated by the motor is proportional
to the current flowing through the motor.
The torque is also equal to the rotational
inertia of the motor multiplied by its rotational
acceleration. This is the rotational equivalent
of the equation F = MA. Now we can write an
expression for the rotational acceleration of the motor in terms of the current flowing into the motor.